# Death Scene Investigation (DSI) Mobile Application

## Introduction

Violence is a nationwide health problem that results in over 50,000 homicides and suicides each year. In order to better understand why violent death occurs, the CDC developed the National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS), a nationwide state-based surveillance system designed to track trends and characteristics of violent deaths with the goal of reducing these deaths. 

Additional information on the NVDRS can be found at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/profiles/nvdrs/facts.htm

In 2002 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) began implementing the NVDRS; Kentucky was funded in 2004. As of 2018, all 50 states, Washington D.C. and territories are all funded. NVDRS is a state-based surveillance system that links data from law enforcement, coroners and medical examiners, vital statistics, and crime laboratories to assist each participating state in designing and implementing tailored prevention and intervention efforts. NVDRS provides data on violence trends at national and regional levels; each state can access all of these important data elements from one central data location or apply for Restricted Access Data from the CDC.

https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/nvdrs/stateprofiles.htmlbase.

## Coroner/Medical Examiner (CME) Data

The Commonwealth of Kentucky has 120 counties, each with its own elected coroner and a fluctuating number of deputy coroners. The coroners have the full authority of peace officers and are charged with the responsibility of investigating and certifying the cause and manner of all deaths under their statutory jurisdiction (KRS 72.405). In coroner cases, the coroner/deputy in the county of the death conduct death scene investigations, interview survivors, gather the medical history and precipitating circumstances, and involve other investigating agencies when applicable. The MEs from the four regional offices request these documents from the coroners to supplement their autopsy findings, from which they recommend to the coroner the cause and manner of death that should be recorded on the death certificate, although the coroner is the official certifier of death in coroner cases in KY. In cases where the KYVDRS staff cannot obtain the investigative report directly from the coroner, KYVDRS staff abstract the documents submitted by the coroner to the ME at the four ME offices, for a minimal fee.  
The coroner works closely with the ME and the law enforcement agency during an investigation to determine the cause of death. The coroner also incorporates the results of the police investigation into a ruling on the cause of death. With the help of the Kentucky Coroner Association’s (KCA) Board of Directors, county coroners, the state medical examiner (SME) director, and using the NVDRS’s demographic and circumstantial fields for violent death,   Dr. Brown facilitated the development of a standard coroner reporting form and web system (The Coroner Investigation Reporting System, CIRS); this standardization improves record keeping practices across KY.  KYVDRS supplies county offices with CIRs notebooks or letter size forms (if the county has submitted all violent death reports) and provides the web-CIRS free of charge, in exchange for data, to motivate continued coroner support. As an additional incentive, coroners participating in the web-CIRS are sent a certificate awarding their participation. Coroners can submit their cases various ways by mailing, faxing, or electronically either through the web system, via email, at a training, at the coroner conference or a visit from the PI for data abstraction. Because Kentucky coroners are elected, there are few funds to facilitate improvements and enforcement to adhere to any system-wide reporting among coroners. In exchange for data both paper flip pads or report style folders and an electronic online coroner reporting system (CIRS) are all provided and can be utilized by all coroners and deputy coroners within the Commonwealth of Kentucky.

## Project Proposal

This design project will contribute to the effort by the CDC to improve data collection from death scenes through an iOS mobile application for death scene investigators to report observations and characteristics of a death scene as well as an Android version of the same application. This cross-platform mobile application will offer significant improvements over the old web-based reporting system (CRI) by providing a responsive UI for the investigators, improving mobility of the application by caching forms that cannot be sent immediately to a database due to a lack of wireless connection and allowing investigators to generate real-time data and metrics about the death scene with on-device sensors. 
